# Pretty ðŸŒ¸ Pretty

[![Run Tests](https://github.com/apparebit/prettypretty/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/apparebit/prettypretty/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![Publish to GitHub Pages](https://github.com/apparebit/prettypretty/actions/workflows/gh-pages.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/apparebit/prettypretty/actions/workflows/gh-pages.yml)

Prettypretty helps build awesome terminal user interfaces in Python and Rust.
Notably, it incorporates a powerful and general color library. The resulting,
near seemless integration of 1970s archaic but beloved ANSI escape codes for
terminal styling with 2020s color science, notably via the [Oklab perceptual
color space](https://bottosson.github.io/posts/oklab/), is unique to
prettypretty and enables your application to easily adapt its visual styles to a
user's current color theme, dark or light mode, and color preferences. So, what
are you waiting for? Switch to prettypretty for all your terminal styling needs.
Prettypretty is awesome!

\[ [Repository](https://github.com/apparebit/prettypretty)
| [Python Package](https://pypi.org/project/prettypretty/)
| [Python Documentation](https://apparebit.github.io/prettypretty/)
| [Rust Package](https://crates.io/crates/prettypretty)
| [Rust Documentation](https://docs.rs/prettypretty/latest/prettypretty/index.html)
\]

## A Drab Reality

Building delightful terminal user interfaces requires coping with significant
variability. Any given terminal may support only 16 or 256 colors. Furthermore,
its appearance has probably been customized, often using a dark theme even if
the OS isn't in dark mode. Such deep configurability is a must. That's because,
in part, terminals' primary users like to tinker. Also, some of those users have
strongly held convictions about their tools' appearances, with some favoring a
low-contrast monochrome and others a psychedelic explosion of rainbows.

So, determining the terminal's level of color support is only a first step out
of many. A command line application also needs to take the current color theme
into account, whether that theme is dark or light, and whether the user approves
of color or not. Assembling all that information is three more steps in the
right direction, but an application still needs *to do something* with that
information, i.e., accordingly adjust its styles. Or, it can keep looking drab
and sad.


## Enter Pretty ðŸŒ¸ Pretty

Prettypretty helps you bring awesome color to this drab world: The library takes
care of determining color support, color theme, and the polarity of the theme.
It also supports user-directed overrides. Once assembled, prettypretty leverages
this information to automatically adjust your application's styles to the
current runtime context. And for that, it uses the latest in color spaces and
algorithms, bringing the benefits of the Oklab perceptual color space and CSS
Color algorithms for contrast and color adjustment to terminals.


## Pretty ðŸŒ¸ Pretty Illustrated

The following screen shots illustrate some of the benefits of prettypretty's
color management, showing off its algorithms for contrast and color adjustment
for the 6x6x6 RGB cube embedded inside 8-bit terminal colors. The first
screenshot demonstrates prettypretty's support for maximizing text contrast by
comparing against backgrounds in all 216 colors from the 6x6x6 RGB cube of 8-bit
terminal colors.

![Background color
grid](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/apparebit/prettypretty/main/docs/figures/rgb6-background.png)


The second screenshot illustrates the reverse challenge, with prettypretty
picking the background color to maximize contrast for text in all 216 colors
from the 6x6x6 RGB cube. If you compare with the previous screenshot, you may
notice that prettypretty's contrast metric, a perceptual contrast metric
surprisingly similar to [APCA](https://github.com/Myndex/apca-w3), is *not*
symmetric. That just why it is more accurate than, say, the WCAG 2.0 formula.

![Text color
grid](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/apparebit/prettypretty/main/docs/figures/rgb6-text.png)


The third screenshot illustrates prettypretty's support for finding the
perceptually closest color out of several colors. That's just how prettypretty
performs high-quality downsampling, in this case turning the 216 colors from the
6x6x6 RGB cube into 16 extended ANSI colors.

![Downsampled colors, macOS
Terminal](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/apparebit/prettypretty/main/docs/figures/rgb6-ansi-macos.png)


Since almost all terminals have robust support for theming just those 16
extended ANSI colors, prettypretty doesn't just use some hardcoded set of colors
but has built-in support for color themes. You can of course configure and
reconfigure the current colors as you please. But prettypretty can do one
better: It can automatically query a terminal for the current theme colors.
The fourth screenshot illustrates the impact. When running in iTerm2 instead of
macOS Terminal, prettypretty makes good use of the brighter colors in one of
iTerm's builtin themes and generates a substantially different grid!

![Downsampled colors,
iTerm2](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/apparebit/prettypretty/main/docs/figures/rgb6-ansi-iterm2.png)


Overall, prettypretty has robust support for:

  * Automatically determining a terminal's level of color support;
  * Automatically determining a terminal's color theme;
  * Automatically determining whether a color theme is light or dark;
  * Automatically determining whether the OS is in light or dark mode;
  * Automatically adjusting terminal styles to terminal capabilities;
  * Finding the closest color out of several;
  * Using that search to perform high-quality downsampling to 8-bit
    and ANSI colors;
  * Maximizing label contrast for a given background color;
  * Maximizing background contrast for a given text color;
  * Converting colors between sRGB, Display P3, Oklab, Oklch, and a
    few other color spaces;
  * Gamut mapping out-of-gamut colors;
  * Finding the closest color out of several;
  * Using that search to perform high-quality downsampling to 8-bit
    and ANSI colors;

Are you still using chalk or other, poor substitutes for real terminal color?
It's time to switch to prettypretty!


---

Copyright 2024 Robert Grimm. The code in this repository has been released as
open source under the [Apache 2.0](LICENSE) license.
